We're talking to Dr. Hannibal Benz.
If you don't mind my English.
And just tell me your name for the tape here.
My name is Kai Sprenger.
And spell it, please.
You spelled it... K-A-I and then S-P-R-E-N-G-E-R.
Good.
Well, this is huge.
You know, that it started with using just images, and then from these images, the idea of the meaning was more...
became a more abstract one, and then letters, and from that I think that that's developed.
And that's what I'm showing here.
The first, let's say, cuneiform.
Cuneiform, right.
Yeah.
And this, uh, um, aerobic.
No, your English is excellent, by the way.
Thank you.
And to contrast this in a way, the very beginning of the history of writing, we would like to contrast this with some piece of modern art, you know, like that.
This is from 1980.
Now, these are all authentic pieces.
Some of them, but some of them are copies.
These are authentic.
And this is interesting because it gives you an idea for what purposes they used writing, and then you have at least two fields.
You have the field of religion, liturgical texts, and you have to remember what they
And in this form we have some sort of a nail.
It's like a document that had been laid down in the fundamental building.
And this document tells you the date when the building was erected, under which ruler, and whose reign, I guess.
And that's authentic?
That's authentic.
Those are wonderful.
So these are all purchased with funds that the museum has that the city makes.
A lot of this must be gifts to everything.
Good.
And here we come to the, let's say, because you're interested in the book, you know, the development of the form of the book.
The first form of the book were these tablets.
Clay tablets, I think.
Clay tablets, yeah.
And, of course, they were absolutely secure.
They couldn't be fortificated.
Because once they had been burned in the oven, you couldn't change the writing anymore, unless you broke it.
This was one form of the thing.
Security.
Yeah, the book, you know, in inverted commas.
The book of saying what?
What did you say?
In what?
Well, I think a book is a book.
A book contains information.
What is that kit there?
This is from the 18th century that gives you an example of Coptic writing.
And Coptic is a form of writing which developed as a mixture of the Euroclific writing mixed with ancient Greek writing.
And the Coptic writing is the
the writing of the Egyptian Christian people, let's put it this way.
And what is that little kit back there, that little pouch?
Yeah, the leather thing.
And this is where this little manuscript has been stored, you know, covered.
It's sort of book-covered together, and how the liquor of the plant itself functioned like some sort of glue.
Here it comes from different forms of paper, how paper is produced, how paper was invented, and for what different objects, apart from the books of course, paper is used today.
As you can see, for example, these are different water slides, but these paper objects,
to say modern art, or toys, or bookbinding, paper to write on, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover, paper to cover.
Well, how do you explain why you think that will happen?
So what are we looking at here?
This is the little book plates, we call them.
To show you whose book it is.
Yeah, I never thought of that.
Even if the book, even if the text is printed 5,000 times in the very same text, you know,
every book has its own individuality by these book plates because if you open the book and you can read this book belongs to William Morris or to whoever the print text which you can find over and over again many thousand copies gains some individuality and I don't know how this idea is going to be conveyed by using digital books
Maybe there's a... It's an interesting... I had never thought of it.
It's a very interesting concept.
It really is.
These are letters.
Yeah, Korean letters.
Korean letters.
As I mentioned before, the Korean people were very, very modern.
As early as the 14th century, they were printing books by the means of single, multiple types.
But there was one difference compared to Gutenberg's concept.
Gutenberg used single movable types cast out of metal types.
And that's what the Korean people did as well.
But Gutenberg combined this invention, this method, with a printing press.
And the Korean people
used another way they had these single metal musical types as well and they were putting them together and composing some type of text then they were inking the text and then they were wrapping the paper with a brush or some wooden tube they were not using the press you know to print it actually and that was that
And this, of course, is an engraving of a Korean print shop, I guess.
These are the composers.
Composers, using the single types, composing the text.
And here we have those printers in a way.
They ink the composed text.
and then they flush the paper over the .
Okay.
Okay, we're now in what we think might have been
This is a creative reconstruction of Gutenberg's printing shop.
Because we always ask, but how do we know Gutenberg?
We have some illustrations, which you can see on the wall here, and the earliest illustration showing a printing shop in the late 15th century, you can see on the right.
dates to the year 1499.
And this conveys the idea how it might have looked like, you know, a printing shop in good luck style.
And we have no original material left, we have no original wooden locks, we have no original metal types.
This is all a reconstruction.
What are these?
This is...
to just regulate the... Oh, it's kind of like a shot, it's like an absorber almost, yeah.
And I'll show you how it works.
Of course, this is not how Gutenberg did it, you know, because every day we have demonstrations here, and to make it a bit easier for us, we're using these blocks here.
But I'll show you how Gutenberg did it.
Where did he mold the type, do you think?
Yeah.
And you do that here too as well, right?
Yes, I can.
Maybe we have to wait a bit till it's hot.
And what do you call this?
It's a forge?
An oven.
But we don't know the consistence of the metals we use.
Definitely he did not use only lead, because lead is very smooth metal.
And if he had used only lead, the lead letters would have bent out of the printing process.
So he needed an alloy of some sort.
That's it.
And it's quite likely that he mixed some sort of antimony bismuth and tin and lead.
Because I'll show you when it's hot.
how quickly this, how it solidified.
Solidified within a second to a... Wow.
He really had to do a lot of work, didn't he, huh?
Yeah.
I mean, in terms of figuring out... And of course, that looks like a pretty, an old case that you must have gotten out of some shop.
This is really something, I have to tell you.
That means in order that people thought, well, this is handwritten, this is like a manuscript, like the usual form they were used to to read manuscripts or texts.
And if you have a look at the outward appearance of the typography, of the writing,
It's very similar to the handwriting of that period, very similar.
You can only see the very same forms and shapes of the different letters, but also the abbreviations, the combinations of letters were the very same which had been used in the manuscripts of that time.
Let me have a look here.
You can see some manuscripts.
Look at that.
It's incredible.
Absolutely magnificent.
This is from Gutenberg's time in the 1440s.
And if you look at the shape of the letters, it's quite similar to very similar stories.
And that is handwritten?
Yes.
I can't imagine, that's why I'm going up to St.
Gollum.
I want to see how they do it.
This is for me, that's fascinating.
And if you keep in mind, this form, the shape of the letters is very similar to a cuckoo lamp.
But if you look at this, you can see that it's very beautifully composed in a way.
You don't have white spaces, irregular white spaces.
The lines are all regular.
They are not jumping around.
The margin is one straight line, it's not jumping around either.
So Gutenberg put a lot of work in the sense of aesthetic work into that.
When you look at the end of every line, somebody else has pointed, he never hyphenated the last line.
Somehow he managed to set up the type, so you never had a hyphenated word at the end of a column.
At the very last line of the poem.
That's true, at the very last line.
That's true, yeah.
So this was very... Brilliant.
Brilliant and a lot of work to measure everything.
And this is 42 lines.
This is 42 lines.
Because some of his Bibles actually had 40 lines.
Some, not the whole Bible, but... Yeah, the point is that, of course, the Bible was not printed in one day, you know.
And some of the pages have only 40 lines and some have only 41.
So you can, looking at this, you can see that during the process of work... They were changing.
They were making adjustments.
Yeah, adjustments.
They had to, you know.
And you could probably date, not date, but you can probably calculate where a Bible was in the press line, whether it was an earlier one or a middle one or a later one.
Yeah, yeah.
We can differentiate different steps of the printing of the Bible, different...
By studying all of the Bibles, of course, which is very important.
And this is volume one.
That's the Old Testament volume?
Yeah.
And this would be the New Testament volume?
That's true.
Do you have two Gutenberg Bibles?
We have one and a half.
Because a complete Gutenberg Bible consists of 1,282 pages, which are usually bound into two volumes, usually.
Since we have three Bible volumes, we have one and a half.
These two volumes here belong to each other.
They form one complete Bible.
And what is the binding?
The binding is not contemporary.
The binding is 18th century now.
So this is not contemporary to Gutenberg's time.
But the binding of that example is on one volume of at least two that form a complete Bible.
The binding of that volume is contemporary to Gutenberg's times.
Now look at the illuminations here.
These are magnificent.
Although I have to say that the illuminator, and this is because I was introduced, the illuminator couldn't read it in Latin.
That's what we can say, because if you look at the text, the Latin text, you have some sort of prologue, and you have the Bible text, the holy text, in a way, you know?
And of course, the text of the Bible is much more important.
And illuminating the initials, the artist should consider the different quality of the text, of course.
But he did not.
The illumination was more or less the same.
This illumination is as beautiful and as brilliant, let's put it this way, as the other one.
And he didn't care what the text was about.
It just saw, well,
There's a space left for me to illuminate.
He's an artist.
And I'm an artist, so I illuminate this.
And this gives us some idea, looking at these details, how actually the book was produced at that time.
It wasn't that people bought a book in the shop like we do today, you know, illustrated, illuminated, bound, everything ready, you know, wrapped in.
You bought it in sections.
You bought more or less the printed paper.
And then you decided on the binding, the art.
That's it.
They would trim the pages.
Were there places on the press, I don't want to go back down, there were pinholes, they used to say they used to pin the press down, the paper down?
Yeah, you can see these.
If you look very, very carefully, on the very top you can see some
What is that writing at the very top of the page?
The very top of the page is handwritten to give a mark to the bookbinder and know what's next.
So that's also contemporary?
It's also contemporary, yeah.
It's in ink?
That's ink, yeah.
And this is written with ink and it says Prologos.
So this was to show the replicator, the person who wrote or who painted the red color.
what words to write.
Like this, you know.
Directions to the rubricator.
Yeah.
And there were also some directions to the bookbinder, as you can see here.
But usually after the binding or while the process of bookbinding, it has been cut away.
And you can see these small words in the margin.
This is handwritten with ink and show the bookbinder what
Fascikel?
You say fascikel?
Faxical.
What faxical to bind next?
Because it is the beginning, the word of the next page, or some sort of numeric numeration to show the bookbinder what's next.
Do you change the pages around often, or do you leave them open to the same pages in the exhibition?
Sometimes we will change.
Which is very important, I think.
The apography is quite obvious, as you mentioned earlier.
It's very smooth, it's brilliant.
It's clean.
It looks really like one piece of art.
But of course, Kuhnberg did not achieve this mastery overnight.
So he had to experiment quite a lot.
We have one very small fragment that gives an idea.
What lay in between the very beginning and this mastery?
If you have a look at this fragment on the left side, look at the lines.
Oh, look at that.
We call that the Weltgerichtfragment.
It's a fragment from the world's final judgment in a way.
And it's before 1450.
It's printed before 1450.
We don't know whether it's been printed in Strasbourg or Mainz.
There's much, much...
debate on this fragment.
But it's commonly accepted, more or less, that it's printed by Gutenberg, even if we don't know the idea.
Because of the type?
Because of the time, that's right.
How about the paper?
It's parchment.
Oh no, sorry, this is paper.
But I mean, is it similar to the other papers that we used?
Yeah, yeah.
They're uneven, yeah.
It's one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, about eleven lines, right?
Yeah, but this is only a fragment because of the harmony of the binding.
Amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
And if you have a look at the space... Where was it found in the binding?
Can we go?
Where was it found?
How recently?
um it's quite old i mean it's found this century beginning of the century well this is the 1459 yeah well the first edition was in 1457 right and this is the second edition which is we're only slightly older and um here we have the first time ever a print book printed
three different colours at one time.
Red, blue and black.
The 1459?
Yeah.
Also the 1457.
That's amazing.
And the type is definitely different.
I would like to find an original title, but just one.
One piece, right?
Just one piece.